HARI SREENIVASAN: The day after
the inauguration of President
Donald Trump, an estimated 3.5
million people in cities around
the country and the world
took part in the Women's March
protesting the Trump agenda in
what may have been the largest
collective protest in American
history.
The march started with
a single Facebook post
and grew from there.
In Raleigh, North Carolina,
Professor Zeynep Tufekci was
one of those faces in the crowd.
ZEYNEP TUFEKCI: Marches are
great, they're really empowering
to people, but the magic
isn't really in the streets by
itself or any online action.
It's when you look at the action
when you're say, a legislator,
thinking, 'Hmm, if they
can march with a million
people what else can they do?'
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tufekci
teaches in the School
of Information at the
University of North
Carolina Chapel Hill and is
the author of the new book,
"Twitter and Tear Gas: the
Power and Fragility
of Networked Protest."
ZEYNEP TUFEKCI, AUTHOR OF
TWITTER AND TEAR GAS: The twist
in the 21st century seems to
be since we can a do
things much easier with
digital technology,
they don't necessarily
have the same level of teeth a
similar action say a March on
Washington might have 30, 40,
50 years ago, because that
was a result of a long
process of organizing.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The March
on Washington for Jobs and
Freedom in 1963 took six months
to organize -- arranging
buses, bag lunches,
singers and speakers, for
a quarter of a million
who attended.
Tufekci says the march was a
show of strength for the Civil
Rights Movement built over the
previous 10 years.
ZEYNEP TUFEKCI: It pushed
the people in power to take
the threat pretty seriously.
HARI SREENIVASAN: One year
later, Congress passed and
President Lyndon Johnson signed
the landmark Civil
Rights Act of 1964.
More recently, Tufekci cites
the success of the conservative
"Tea Party" movement.
It began in the spring of
2009 with a viral video.
RICK SANTELLI, CNBC'S
SQUAWK BOX, FEBRUARY
2009: This is America.
How many of you people
want to pay for your
neighbor's mortgage?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Followed
by tax day protests
around the country.
By the November 2010 midterm
elections, the movement
had a measurable impact.
ZEYNEP TUFEKCI: They got
50 plus Congress people.
They essentially blocked
President Obama's
second term agenda, and
arguably, they elected
a president that they like, so
it just shows what the protest
leads to depends on what
happens next.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In 2011, on
the other side of the political
spectrum, one email, inspired
by the Arab Spring protests,
started "Occupy Wall Street."
Within weeks, it was a
movement with encampments
all over the country.
But when the camps came
down, "Occupy" had little
to show for its agenda.
ZEYNEP TUFEKCI: On the one
hand, it was really powerful in
bringing to people's attention
something that was
important: inequality.
But if you look at the electoral
results or at sort of the
policy, it wasn't taken as
a threat.
And the people in power just
didn't really change their
way: inequality hasn't gone
down, we don't have any
new legislation that tries
to dampen inequality.
So you can sort of see
that the digital technology
empowered both of them,
but they start taking
different turns right
after, with really
different consequences.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The ease of
organizing and mobilizing online
has led to a common critique.
For a while, it was just
considered "slacktivism."
Is it too easy, just to click
a link and signal that I like
this and I don't like this?
How does it translate
into action?
ZEYNEP TUFEKCI: I think
it's a great first step.
So, that's why I don't like
the term "slacktivism."
I don't think it's slacking
in anything to click.
It could be a very
powerful first step.
Even if it stops
there, it's got power.
The question is: How do you
take that very widespread, but
relatively shallow level of
engagement and give people
who clearly wanting to
do something else, right?
How do you organize it so that
more people can step and say,
"Here are things you could
do collectively," and by doing
it collectively along the way
you'll build those important
skills of decision-making
together and hanging together.
HARI SREENIVASAN:
While activists adopted
digital technology
tools, governments tried
and failed to disrupt them.
For instance, Tufekci
points to the 2011 protests
in Cairo's Tahrir Square.
ZEYNEP TUFEKCI: The government
just didn't know what to do,
so they just shut off the
internet, which completely
backfired, it was the absolute
wrong thing to do if you were
a government.
Because it just brings
attention, and a lot
of parents who were
getting news from their
kids in Tahrir Square the
cell phones were also cut.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But
governments have also learned
how to use digital technology.
Five years later, during an
attempted coup in Turkey,
President Recep Tayyip Erdogan
relied on digital technology
-- his iPhone Facetime app --
to rally supporters against
rebellious soldiers.
ZEYNEP TUFEKCI: It was really
sort of amazing to watch this.
It was just this little
screen, but it confirmed to
the country that he was alive.
They realized very
quickly that the internet,
and digital technology
would be on their side
to counter this coup.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You point
out how crucial Twitter and
Facebook were in getting people
to come out to the street.
But you also point out that
there's a tremendous amount of
power on these platforms now and
the way that the algorithms
are designed, could actually
determine the success or failure
of a movement?
ZEYNEP TUFEKCI: Absolutely.
For example, Facebook, uses an
algorithm, a computer program
to choose how to rank what
it shows you.
So if you don't see something
from someone, maybe Facebook
isn't showing it to you.
For a social movement that's
incredibly consequential.
HARI SREENIVASAN: It was
consequential in the summer of
2014, as protests erupted on
the streets of Ferguson,
Missouri, following the
fatal shooting of an
unarmed black teenager,
Michael Brown, by a
white police officer.
Early on, Tufekci says, the
protests got a lot of attention
on Twitter but less so on
Facebook because of
another viral sensation:
the Ice Bucket Challenge.
ZEYNEP TUFECKI: Facebook kept
showing me the Ice Bucket
Challenge, even if it was from
weeks ago kept showing
the same thing.
You know how you go
on and there's baby
picture, baby picture,
it just shows you things
that are cute and cuddly
and that get the "likes,"
and that's how it operates.
For a social movement, trying
to break into the public sphere
that could mean a form of
algorithmic censorship because
the algorithm likes certain
things and doesn't like certain
things.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tufekci says
the motivations of social media
companies and social movements
are not necessarily aligned.
ZEYNEP TUFEKCI: In the end,
it's a platform that is based
on delivering you ads, and they
want to sort of keep you
on there with things that
will keep you on there.
And all of their business
models aren't necessarily in the
interests of what the movements
are trying to do long term.
HARI SREENIVASAN: How does the
Women's March or Black Lives
Matter how do they sustain
themselves and turn themselves
into powerful actors that can
be a threat to whomever it
is that they want to
force change through?
ZEYNEP TUFEKCI: Right.
The lesson I take from all of
my research into this isn't
stop using digital technologies.
It's recognize what they're
good for, and use them
fully what they're good for.
But really recognize what
they're not good for.
You can use a hashtag to
get millions of people
to the street, but you
can't use a hashtag
to figure out how does a group
of 100 people in one zip code
figure out who is going to
run for school board.
It's going to come to a hybrid
model, where we use tech for
what it's good for but not
be blinded by the power it gives
us in some areas and ignore
that it's actually weakening
us in other areas by helping
us scale up almost too fast.
You know you are going from 0
to 100 miles in just a month or
two you need a better steering
wheel than a Facebook group.